Add high-level, mostly correct, introduction document (#4290)
dotnet/msbuild: documentation/high-level-introduction.md

# A brief introduction to msbuild (Level 101)

## Introduction

> Documentation on msbuild is both widespread and yet much of it is difficult to parse for those coming up to speed. There are also no good "high level" docs that paint a picture on how the parts are put together.

Reviewer: I would probably move this justification into the PR comment, the reader doesn't need to know

- Splitting language specific items from a Common file to CSharp and FSharp versions of the same file. 

None of these are enforced by msbuild itself. The files commonly included by user projects just assume you will follow these conventions.

## File Structure Convention

Before we get into the specifics of how things work, let’s talk about the general file structure, which is built upon many standard conventions. We’ll cover the how [data is represented](#data) and the [nodes available](#XML-Structure) in each shortly. 

### Text Files

Instead of including every single detail of a build in the user projects, this information tends to be split into multiple places. Some of these are provided by SDKs are stored in standard global locations, for example: `/Library/Frameworks/Mono.framework/External/xbuild/Xamarin/` 

- Project files (csproj)
  - These are user provided files describing the files, references, and settings for the build in question. 
  - These tend to contain many Reference items and additions to the Compile and None item group
  - These tend to include one single project specific “target” file that include the rest of the files needed to define the entire build.

> `<Import Project="$(MSBuildExtensionsPath)\Xamarin\Mac\Xamarin.Mac.CSharp.targets" />`

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should just be a .NET framework import:
```xml
<Import Project="$(MSBuildBinPath)\Microsoft.CSharp.targets" />
```

Author: So this was an example, using an SDK specific version. Let me extend it.

>   - Solution files (sln) just combine one or more projects for editing and building. The project file is main level of build knowledge.

Reviewer: I would also specify here that solution files specify build dependencies and configurations (i.e. this is mac only)

- Target Files (.targets)
  - These files are generally provided by the SDKs
  - These files generally describe a set of steps (targets) which need to be executed to process the build
  - These tend to contain many UsingTask items to reference task assembly targets and Target to define the targets and dependencies
- Property file (.props)
  - These files are generally provided by the SDKs
  - These files generally set a number of properties used by the targets
  - These tend to contain many PropertyGroup and ItemGroup items defining values needed in the builds.

All of these are are [XML Structured](#XML-Structure) text files.

> As I noted above, there is nothing truly special with the names and suffixes here. You could rename (targets and props) to (candy and chocolate) and things would still work the same. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need to say this

### Libraries 

Many parts of the build involve invoking outside tools or operations that would be burdensome to write in XML. Task assemblies allow extension of the msbuild by defining types in a C# library that can be called by msbuild targets.

- Task Assemblies (.dll)
  - These files are generally provided by the SDKs
  - These are C# libraries which reference various msbuild libraries
  - These define [tasks](#MSBuild-Tasks) which can be invoked inside defined targets to carry out parts of the builds.
  - They are loaded when other msbuild files use `UsingTask` nodes

## Data

- There is only one data type in msbuild for values. Everything is a string.
- msbuild distinguished between two types of data, properties and items:

>   - Properties are single named elements elements 

Reviewer: duplicated word

  - `Task` - A generic “I want to do some work” base class with and `Execute ()` method to override
  - `ToolTask` - A base class that makes invoking a single external tool significantly easier
- Parameters are passed via public properties defined on the task

```
public abstract class CodesignNativeLibraries : Task 
{
    public string SessionId { get; set; }
    
    [Required]
    public string AppBundleDir { get; set; }
}
```

  - The can be marked [Required] which will fail the build if not given a non empty string value
  - Strings are the common type, but you can use types like bool and msbuild will convert for you
  - ITaskItem[] are need to pass Items (lists) to \ from tasks when the task may need to modify them
- They are later invoked with:

```
     <UsingTask TaskName="Xamarin.iOS.Tasks.CodesignNativeLibraries" AssemblyFile="Xamarin.iOS.Tasks.dll" />
     
    <Target Name="_CodesignNativeLibraries">
                    <CodesignNativeLibraries
                            SessionId="$(BuildSessionId)"
                            AppBundleDir="$(AppBundleDir)"
                            >
                    </CodesignNativeLibraries>

>     </Target>

Reviewer 2: Could this be a simpler example? Something that wouldn't require some thinking about Mac/iOS? I'm thinking if someone has no idea about those things.

Author: Made a more trivial example.

  - One important thing to note is the “magic” injection of files
    - When referenced the props file will be “auto injected” to the top of your project and the targets injected at the very bottom. 
    - Thus you can include files for these project types you don’t explicitly see referenced in the csproj

## Debugging
  - Easily the most important thing is to get a full diagnostic build. This will list all variables set and the ordering\execution of each target.
  - You can add debug “Console.WriteLine”s by using the built in MessageTask:

            <Message Text="Project File Name = $(MSBuildProjectFile)" />

    - **Do note these must be inside targets**. They are only executed during Target Eval time.
    - If you put them inside ItemGroups or PropertyGroups they will be ignored.
  - There is a new “binary log” hotness which acts as a full diagnostics build but is faster and contains even more information. You can enable it by passing `/bl`  to msbuild. Read more about it [here](https://github.com/Microsoft/msbuild/blob/master/documentation/wiki/Binary-Log.md). 
    - The support for loading .binlog files in Visual Studio for Mac is still somewhat new

>   - If you are developing on Windows you can add a `System.Diagnostics.Debugger.Break()` invocation and attach Visual Studio to the process.

Reviewer 2: I tested this recently, and it seems you need `Debugger.Launch()` now.

Reviewer: I think whether Break prompts to open a debugger is some system wide just-in-time debugging setting. I don't actually know how to turn it on.

# A brief introduction to msbuild (Level 101)

## Introduction

This document aims to be a “101 college” level introduction into msbuild, useful for those coming to msbuild with very little background in how it works.

### What is msbuild?

> msbuild is a build system commonly used to build .NET projects. It is made up the msbuild toolchain itself, and some number of additional files provided by the SDKs which provide platform specific instructions on how to process projects of those types.

Reviewer 3: "It is made up the msbuild toolchain itself"
should be
"It is made up of the msbuild toolchain itself"?

msbuild is built up of a few very generic ideas:

- Run a sequence of defined steps based upon input / output files and dependency ordering

> - Store single and groups of values in a global table

Author: Because they _are_ separate tables. If you define one as a group and try to read it as a single you'll get empty string as a return.

The fact that you could have two different variables with the same name was the source of no end of trouble.

> - Store single and groups of values in a global table

Reviewer 4: Are you talking about properties vs. items? Other than that they're defined and accessed differently, they're essentially the same thing. You could have a property with lots of semicolons, for instance. You're right that it could be confusing, so perhaps it's best to say "Store values in one of _two_ global tables"? That would clarify that the tables are fully separate, so you can have two variables with the same name.

- Steps can load C# library tasks and execute them
- Include other files in the file we are processing 

Built on top of those bare bones are a huge number of conventions:

- Separating your data and step definitions in different files (see file structure below)
- Creating common locations to import “SDK” files from

> - Standard variables to add source files \ references \ resources

Reviewer 5: Backslashes instead of slashes are used throughout this file. Change them to forward slashes?

> - Prefixing “private” tasks with underscore

Reviewer 6: `tasks` > `steps`? (since the previous paragraph talks about steps, which I assume are the targets).

Author: Much of this is due to ignorance on my end. I picked up most of this via trial and error.

I'll add a clarification.

> - Splitting language specific items from a Common file to CSharp and FSharp versions of the same file. 

Reviewer 6: VB.NET too ;)

## File Structure Convention

Before we get into the specifics of how things work, let’s talk about the general file structure, which is built upon many standard conventions. We’ll cover the how [data is represented](#data) and the [nodes available](#XML-Structure) in each shortly. 

### Text Files

Instead of including every single detail of a build in the user projects, this information tends to be split into multiple places. Some of these are provided by SDKs are stored in standard global locations, for example: `/Library/Frameworks/Mono.framework/External/xbuild/Xamarin/` 

- Project files (csproj)
  - These are user provided files describing the files, references, and settings for the build in question. 
  - These tend to contain many Reference items and additions to the Compile and None item group
  - These tend to include one single project specific “target” file that include the rest of the files needed to define the entire build.

Examples:

`<Import Project="$(MSBuildBinPath)\Microsoft.CSharp.targets" />`
`<Import Project="$(MSBuildExtensionsPath)\Xamarin\Mac\Xamarin.Mac.CSharp.targets" />`

>   - Solution files (sln) combine one or more projects for editing and building. They contain some build dependency and configurations information, but project files are main level of build knowledge.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Solution files (.sln) combine one or more projects for editing and building. They contain some build dependency and configuration information, but project files are the main level of build knowledge.
```

  - These files generally set a number of properties used by the targets
  - These tend to contain many PropertyGroup and ItemGroup items defining values needed in the builds.

All of these are are [XML Structured](#XML-Structure) text files.

As I noted above, there is nothing truly special with the names and suffixes, they are just standard conventions you should follow.

### Libraries 

Many parts of the build involve invoking outside tools or operations that would be burdensome to write in XML. Task assemblies allow extension of the msbuild by defining types in a C# library that can be called by msbuild targets.

- Task Assemblies (.dll)
  - These files are generally provided by the SDKs
  - These are C# libraries which reference various msbuild libraries
  - These define [tasks](#MSBuild-Tasks) which can be invoked inside defined targets to carry out parts of the builds.
  - They are loaded when other msbuild files use `UsingTask` nodes

## Data

- There is only one data type in msbuild for values. Everything is a string.
- msbuild distinguished between two types of data, properties and items:
  - Properties are single named elements 

>     - Think of accessing into a Dictionary<string, string> with the name type being the key

Reviewer 8: Case insensitive.

    - They are defined in PropertyGroups

            <PropertyGroup>
              <DebugSymbols>true</DebugSymbols>
            </PropertyGroup>

>        - This defines a property "DebugSymbols” with the value “true”

Reviewer 4: This is very clear.

>     - They are referenced later via $(NAME)

Reviewer 4: It might be helpful here (and for Items below) to give sample input and output like:
One could refer to the above example with `$(DebugSymbols)`. This would be replaced with `true` before evaluating further. This is particularly helpful in clarifying what the "They may be represented by a semicolon-separated string of items" (and correct that line) part means.

  - Items are a list of properties containing one or more elements
    - Think of accessing into a Dictionary<string, List<string>> with the name type being the key
    - They are defined in ItemGroups

            <ItemGroup>
              <Reference Include="System" />
            </ItemGroup>

      - This includes the value “System” in the Item Reference, which may already have zero or more items
    - There are also Exclude, Remove, and other actions you can do on an Item
    - They are referenced later via @(LIST_NAME) or [list transforms](#List-Transforms).
    - The may be represented by a semicolon separated string of items

> - **Variables will return empty string if not defined!**

Reviewer 4: maybe add something about not throwing an error? It's implied, but it would be nice to be explicit.

  - If you reference an property when you meant an item, you will get the undefined empty string.

## Node Types

There are many, but the most common include:

- `<PropertyGroup>`
  - As seen above, children of this are set as properties in the global context. 
- `<ItemGroup>`
  - As seen above, children of this are processed in as Items (lists) of the name of the node
- `<Target>`
  - Defines a target which will be considered when we get to execution set

>   - Before\After and BuildDependsOn will determine ordering

Reviewer 4: Explain further?

>   - Inputs\Ouputs will determine if run at all

Reviewer 4: Explain further?

  - Can contain one or more children that are executed in sequence when the target is executed
- `<UsingTask>`
  - Loads a task type from the given C# library assembly for execution later by a `<Target>`
- `<Import>`
  - “Include” another file into the current process
-  `<Project>`
  - The “top level” parent of all content in a given file.

## XML Structure
  - The top level of each project\target\prop file is a `<Project>` node which contains many children
  - As noted above, each specific file type tends to contain certain items. However **these are all conventions**! 
  - If the XML is invalid (unclosed tag, etc) your build may fail in strange ways.

>     - macios has an xml check as pat of `make msbuild`

Reviewer 4: Did you mean MacOS has an xml check as part...?

**Logic Constructs**

  - Many nodes can have Conditions which when false will prevent them and their children from being used in a given build.
    - Conditions can even prevent entire files from being included. 
    - Almost everything can have one and they are very powerful
  - There are XML constructs that mirror switch statements, recursion, and many other programming elements.
  - As everything is strings, comparisions involves a number of quotes:

            <SwiftVerbose Condition="'$(SwiftVerbose)' == ''">false</SwiftVerbose>

    - Outer `"` for the contents of the condition
    - `'` around the variable itself

>     - `'’` for empty string

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    - `''` for empty string
```

>   - Remember, unset variables are valid to access and provide empty string

Reviewer 4: ...access and return the empty string.

**List Transforms**

>   - If your contents contain a `%` then you will be run like a “for each” for each element in the relevant itemgroup.

Reviewer 4: "for each loop" for each...ItemGroup.

  - See the [XA doc](https://github.com/xamarin/xamarin-android/blob/master/Documentation/guides/MSBuildBestPractices.md#item-group-transforms) and [msbuild docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-transforms?view=vs-2017) for more details. It’s powerful but complex.

**Property Functions**

  - It is possible to invoke C# properties and functions from msbuild. 
  - This is useful for a number of use cases, including string and path manipulation and math operations.
  - See the [documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/property-functions?view=vs-2019) for more details.

## MSBuild Tasks
- These are C# types defined in a library. 

> - The specifics of creating a new task library is outside the scope of this guide.

Reviewer 4: Maybe link to the specifics as above?

- There are two common base classes for Tasks:

>   - `Task` - A generic “I want to do some work” base class with and `Execute ()` method to override

Reviewer 4: ...with an `Execute()` method users can override

>   - `ToolTask` - A base class that makes invoking a single external tool significantly easier

Reviewer 4: Explain or link?

- Parameters are passed via public properties defined on the task

> ```

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```c#
```

public abstract class MySpecialTask : Task 
{
    public string MyOptionalArg { get; set; }
    
    [Required]
    public string MyRequiredArg { get; set; }
}
```

>   - The can be marked [Required] which will fail the build if not given a non empty string value

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  - Properties can be marked [Required] which will fail the build if given an empty string value
```

  - Strings are the common type, but you can use types like bool and msbuild will convert for you

>   - ITaskItem[] are need to pass Items (lists) to \ from tasks when the task may need to modify them

Reviewer 4: ITaskItem[] is necessary to pass Items (lists) to or from tasks if the task may need to modify them

> - They are later invoked with:

Reviewer 4: Maybe move the sample Target a little earlier so you only have the invocation part under "They are later invoked with:"?

> ```

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```xml
```

     <UsingTask TaskName="MyTasks.MySpecialTask" AssemblyFile="MyTasks.dll" />
     
    <Target Name="_MySpecialTask">
                    <MySpecialTask
                            MyOptionalArg="$(MyOptionalArg)"
                            MyRequiredArg="$(MyRequiredArg)"
                            >
                    </MySpecialTask>
    </Target>
```

> - You can attach a C# debugger to the task, but that can be tricky on mono since there is no attach to process

Reviewer 4: ?

> - `SessionId` is needed on most C# tasks to enable “build remoting” for Visual Studio Windows.

Reviewer 4: Visual Studio on Windows.

## Execution Model

> A very inaccurate but useful way of thinking about how msbuild processes is to split it into three parts.

Reviewer 4: ...processes an XML file is...

- Loading
  - Starting with the csproj load each file included into a giant buffer
    - Think C preprocessor gloming files together
  - Some default values will be set in the global property dictionary
- Property Eval
  - Starting from the top, evaluate every node
    - Property and Item Group will set items in the global context
    - UsingTask will load task assemblies and prepare to invoke them

>     - Targets will define then and their ordering\inputs\output

Reviewer 4: ?

>       - **Their contants will not be executed yet**

Reviewer 3: > 
```suggestion
      - **Their contents will not be executed yet**
```

  - This will respect conditions, and be done top to bottom based upon include order
- Target Eval

>   - Starting with the defined “DefaultTargets", which for our purposes is always “Build” determine a list of target to invoke and their ordering

Reviewer 4: ...is always "Build," determine the order in which targets should execute.
^ clearer as far as what you mean by "their ordering," but I'm split as to whether it's really sufficient to say order and assume that it also finds a list.

  - Invoke one at a time, comparing their Input\Output against file timestamps like make

## "SDK style” project and nuget injection

>   - SDK style projects and nugets are beyond the scope of this document 

Reviewer 4: Link? Also, it might be good to combine this and the next line to prevent me from wondering why you'd bring it up in the first place.

  - One important thing to note is the “magic” injection of files

>     - When referenced the props file will be “auto injected” to the top of your project and the targets injected at the very bottom. 

Reviewer 4: If the props file is referenced, it will be "auto-injected" to the top of your project, and the targets will similarly be injected at the bottom.

>     - Thus you can include files for these project types you don’t explicitly see referenced in the csproj

Reviewer 4: csproj? What is this csproj? I've only ever seen vbproj... ;)

## Debugging
  - Easily the most important thing is to get a full diagnostic build. This will list all variables set and the ordering\execution of each target.
  - You can add debug “Console.WriteLine”s by using the built in MessageTask:

> 

Reviewer 4: Extra line?

Also, should it be mentioned that if you're trying to change MSBuild itself, you need to make the messages verbose?

            <Message Text="Project File Name = $(MSBuildProjectFile)" />

>     - **Do note these must be inside targets**. They are only executed during Target Eval time.

Reviewer 4: ^ Good

    - If you put them inside ItemGroups or PropertyGroups they will be ignored.
  - There is a new “binary log” hotness which acts as a full diagnostics build but is faster and contains even more information. You can enable it by passing `/bl`  to msbuild. Read more about it [here](https://github.com/Microsoft/msbuild/blob/master/documentation/wiki/Binary-Log.md). 
    - The support for loading .binlog files in Visual Studio for Mac is still somewhat new
  - If you are developing on Windows you can add a `System.Diagnostics.Debugger.Launch()` invocation and attach Visual Studio to the process.

## Gotchas
  - Visual Studio for Mac will cache your task assemblies but not your target\prop files, usually.
    - This means if you make changes to a task assembly, your changes may not be reflected until you restart your IDE.
    - This is why I always test using msbuild from the command line OR write an nunit test that invokes msbuild directly.

>   - Ordering matters, dearly

Reviewer 4: Order matters. A lot.

>     - If file A defines and variable and B uses it, then A must be included before B in all cases.

Reviewer 4: If file A defines a variable, and file B uses it...

>     - If you get this wrong, then B will start getting empty string and not the valid variable

Reviewer 4: Otherwise, B will see the empty string instead of the true value of the variable.

    - This is why people generally use props and targets files to keep the order right

>     - You can not safely refactor msbuild without serious testing. 

Reviewer 4: cannot

  - Everything is a string

>     - Typos will ruin your day, since you’ll get empty strings in places you do not expect

Reviewer 4: ...in unexpected places.

>     - Make sure your quotes are correct else you will be very confused

Reviewer 4: ...quotes are correct, or you will be very confused.

It would be good to be more consistent about whether sentences in bullet points should end in "." or not.

- MSBuild distinguished between two types of data, properties and items:
  - Properties are single named elements 
    - Think of accessing into a Dictionary<string, string> with the name type being the case insensitive key
    - They are defined in PropertyGroups

            <PropertyGroup>
              <DebugSymbols>true</DebugSymbols>
            </PropertyGroup>

       - This defines a property "DebugSymbols” with the value “true”
    - They are referenced later via $(NAME)
  - Items are a list of properties containing one or more elements
    - Think of accessing into a Dictionary<string, List<string>> with the name type being the key
    - They are defined in ItemGroups

            <ItemGroup>
              <Reference Include="System" />
            </ItemGroup>

      - This includes the value “System” in the Item Reference, which may already have zero or more items
    - There are also Exclude, Remove, and other actions you can do on an Item
    - They are referenced later via @(LIST_NAME) or [list transforms](#List-Transforms)
    - The may be represented by a semicolon separated string of items
- **Variables will return empty string if not defined!**

>   - If you reference an property when you meant an item, you will get the undefined empty string

Reviewer 9: > an property

to:
> a property

## Node Types

> There are many, but the most common include:

Reviewer 9: As a reader I would be confused about:
> There are many

Where would I find a list of those?
Perhaps a link would be better then leaving a reader on his own with just a piece of information?

    - The support for loading .binlog files in Visual Studio for Mac is still somewhat new
  - If you are developing on Windows you can add a `System.Diagnostics.Debugger.Launch()` invocation and attach Visual Studio to the process

## Gotchas
  - Visual Studio for Mac will cache your task assemblies but not your target/prop files, usually
    - This means if you make changes to a task assembly, your changes may not be reflected until you restart your IDE
    - This is why I always test using MSBuild from the command line OR write an nunit test that invokes MSBuild directly
  - Ordering matters, dearly
    - If file A defines a variable and B uses it, then A must be included before B in all cases
    - Otherwise, B will see the empty string instead of the true value of the variable
    - This is why people generally use props and targets files to keep the order right
    - You cannot safely refactor MSBuild without serious testing. 
  - Everything is a string

>     - Typos will ruin your day, since you’ll get empty strings in in unexpected places

Reviewer 9: > empty strings in in unexpected

to:
> empty strings in unexpected
